# SOBEL EDGE DETECTION FILTER

### INTRODUCTION:
The Sobel Edge Detection filter uses the Sobel approach and algorithm to calculate relative edges in a provided image and display the edges on a scale of black to white depending on the intensity of the edge. Included are demonstrations of this filter in JavaScript, C++, and using WebAssembly. Timing implementations are also included in the code so that relative speeds can be compared between different implementations.

## PREREQUISITES:

### REQUIREMENTS:
* Linux - Ubuntu 16.04
* Intel C++ compiler or gcc
* Google Chrome
* WebAssembly
* Emscripten
* Visual Studio 2017

### INSTALLATION:
**Intel C++ Compiler:** [Download Compiler](https://software.intel.com/en-us/c-compilers)

**WebAssembly:** [Overview](https://www.w3.org/wasm/)

**Emscripten:** [Setting Up Emscripten](https://kripken.github.io/emscripten-site/docs/tools_reference/emsdk.html)

**Visual Studio 2017:** [Visual Studio](https://www.visualstudio.com/downloads/)

## INCLUDED FILES:
**CPP Folder:**
```
Makefile
sobelFilter.cpp
sobelFilter.vcxproj
sobelFilter.vcxproj.filters
SobelFilterImage.yuv
```
**WWW Folder:**
```
sobelFilter.html
sobelFilter.js
sobel.js
sobelFilter.css
sobelFilter.wasm
SobelFilterImage.jpg
```
## IMPLEMENTATIONS:

### JAVASCRIPT:
The JavaScript implementation allows the user to select an image from their computer using the `Choose File` button and will accept a *.jpeg, .jpg, .png,* or *.tif* formatted image. This image is imported into a canvas and output onto the screen. The RGBA Image Data is then retrieved from the canvas, converted to grayscale using the formula given below, and stored in a two-dimensional array.

```
gray = red * 0.3 + green * 0.59 + blue * 0.11
```

The grayscale data is passed into the Sobel Filter, and the resulting data is returned in a two-dimensional array. This array is converted back to RGBA Image Data and displayed on the canvas.

Timing measurements are taken using performance.now() and displayed on the console.

*Note:* Implementation is performed using Google Chrome.

### C++:
The C++ implementation takes a YUV image and imports the Y data into a two-dimensional array. This array is then passed through the Sobel Filter function, which applies the Sobel Filter to the image, and stores that data in another array. The manipulated array is then written to a .yuv file.

To change the YUV image that will be sent through the filter, change the names in this section of code:

```
FILE *fp = NULL;
fp = fopen("InputImageName.yuv", "rb");
FILE *fout = fopen("OutputImageName_out.yuv", "wb");
```

Timing measurements are taken using a high-resolution clock, and displayed on the terminal.

*Note:* Only the Y component of the YUV image is taken into account because the Sobel Filter must be applied to a grayscale image, which is found in the Y component.

### WEBASSEMBLY:

The WebAssembly (WASM) implementation is run using a combination of JavaScript and C++. The JavaScript runs as explained above to convert the image to grayscale data. This grayscale data is then passed into WASM.

WASM is compiled using emscripten, as described below. The WASM binary is also included with the distribution as `sobelFilter.wasm` so that you can run the WebAssembly tests without building your own WASM binary.

WASM calculates the Sobel filter image data using the same algorithm as previous examples, and returns an array of data which is then converted to RGBA Image Data and displayed on the canvas.

Timing measurements are taken using performance.now() and displayed on the console.

*Note:* Implementation is performed using Google Chrome and Emscripten.

## BUILD INSTRUCTIONS:
**Windows:**

Open the `sobelFilter.vcxproj` file in Visual Studio 2017 and build it. Open *Developer Command Line for Visual Studios 2017* and run the executable.

**Linux:**		

Open the `sobelFilter.cpp` and `Makefile` files in Visual Studio Insiders. Verify that the Makefile paths are correct and then build and run the executable in the terminal using:
```
/$ make clean
/$ make
/$ ./sobelFilter
```
**WebAssembly (Emscripten):**

We use the emscripten compiler `emcc` to compile our C++ file sobelFilter.cpp to WebAssembly as follows:

```
emcc sobelFilter.cpp -o sobel.js -O3 -s WASM=1 -s EXPORTED_FUNCTIONS='["_sobelFilter", "_malloc", "_free"]' -s ALLOW_MEMORY_GROWTH=1 
```

Below we explain each of the compiling options used.

`-o sobel.js` Here we specify our output JavaScript file, which loads the WebAssembly from the .wasm file automatically generated by the compiler, and sets up our exported functions written in C++. 

`-O3` Tells emscripten compiler to optimize very aggressively, improving performance. Click [here](https://kripken.github.io/emscripten-site/docs/optimizing/Optimizing-Code.html) for more information on emcc optimization flags.

`-s EXPORTED_FUNCTIONS` Here we specify which C functions we want to export from sobel.cpp for use in JavaScript, with a '_' in front of each of the function names. Note that the emscripten compiler cuts out unnecessary code, so it is necessary in our C file to use the `EMSCRIPTEN_KEEPALIVE` declaration to indicate which functions we want to keep. Since WebAssembly can't recognize JavaScript arrays, we need to pass buffers in their place into our exported functions. So in addition to the sobelFilter function, we also need malloc and free in order to allocate and free memory on the heap.  

`-s ALLOW_MEMORY_GROWTH` By default, WebAssembly's memory arrays can each hold exactly 16777216 bytes.In order to ensure that data from very large files can be stored, we set ALLOW_MEMORY_GROWTH to true to allow for enlarging of these arrays at runtime. Alternatively, the initial amount of memory can be increased using the option `-s TOTAL_MEMORY`.

## CREDITS/ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:
Rich Winterton (Intel), Deepti Aggarwal (Intel), Tuyet Trang Lam (Intel), Brittney Coons (Intel), Nathan Johns (Intel)

## COPYRIGHT/LICENSE:
*Copyright(c) 2018 Intel Corporation*

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files(the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and / or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
 
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.